---
title: "最后的问题"
author: 艾萨克·阿西莫夫
categories:
date: 2022-11-09 12:17:49 +0800
tags: 科幻 小说
excerpt:
---

## 原文

The last question was asked for the first time, half in jest, on May 21, 2061, at a time when humanity first stepped into the light. The question came about as a result of a five dollar bet over highballs, and it happened this way:
Alexander Adell and Bertram Lupov were two of the faithful attendants of Multivac. As well as any human beings could, they knew what lay behind the cold, clicking, flashing face -- miles and miles of face -- of that giant computer. They had at least a vague notion of the general plan of relays and circuits that had long since grown past the point where any single human could possibly have a firm grasp of the whole.

Multivac was self-adjusting and self-correcting. It had to be, for nothing human could adjust and correct it quickly enough or even adequately enough -- so Adell and Lupov attended the monstrous giant only lightly and superficially, yet as well as any men could. They fed it data, adjusted questions to its needs and translated the answers that were issued. Certainly they, and all others like them, were fully entitled to share In the glory that was Multivac's.

For decades, Multivac had helped design the ships and plot the trajectories that enabled man to reach the Moon, Mars, and Venus, but past that, Earth's poor resources could not support the ships. Too much energy was needed for the long trips. Earth exploited its coal and uranium with increasing efficiency, but there was only so much of both.

But slowly Multivac learned enough to answer deeper questions more fundamentally, and on May 14, 2061, what had been theory, became fact.

The energy of the sun was stored, converted, and utilized directly on a planet-wide scale. All Earth turned off its burning coal, its fissioning uranium, and flipped the switch that connected all of it to a small station, one mile in diameter, circling the Earth at half the distance of the Moon. All Earth ran by invisible beams of sunpower.

Seven days had not sufficed to dim the glory of it and Adell and Lupov finally managed to escape from the public function, and to meet in quiet where no one would think of looking for them, in the deserted underground chambers, where portions of the mighty buried body of Multivac showed. Unattended, idling, sorting data with contented lazy clickings, Multivac, too, had earned its vacation and the boys appreciated that. They had no intention, originally, of disturbing it.

They had brought a bottle with them, and their only concern at the moment was to relax in the company of each other and the bottle.

"It's amazing when you think of it," said Adell. His broad face had lines of weariness in it, and he stirred his drink slowly with a glass rod, watching the cubes of ice slur clumsily about. "All the energy we can possibly ever use for free. Enough energy, if we wanted to draw on it, to melt all Earth into a big drop of impure liquid iron, and still never miss the energy so used. All the energy we could ever use, forever and forever and forever."

Lupov cocked his head sideways. He had a trick of doing that when he wanted to be contrary, and he wanted to be contrary now, partly because he had had to carry the ice and glassware. "Not forever," he said.

"Oh, hell, just about forever. Till the sun runs down, Bert."

"That's not forever."

"All right, then. Billions and billions of years. Twenty billion, maybe. Are you satisfied?"

Lupov put his fingers through his thinning hair as though to reassure himself that some was still left and sipped gently at his own drink. "Twenty billion years isn't forever."

"Will, it will last our time, won't it?"

"So would the coal and uranium."

"All right, but now we can hook up each individual spaceship to the Solar Station, and it can go to Pluto and back a million times without ever worrying about fuel. You can't do THAT on coal and uranium. Ask Multivac, if you don't believe me."

"I don't have to ask Multivac. I know that."

"Then stop running down what Multivac's done for us," said Adell, blazing up. "It did all right."

"Who says it didn't? What I say is that a sun won't last forever. That's all I'm saying. We're safe for twenty billion years, but then what?" Lupov pointed a slightly shaky finger at the other. "And don't say we'll switch to another sun."

There was silence for a while. Adell put his glass to his lips only occasionally, and Lupov's eyes slowly closed. They rested.

Then Lupov's eyes snapped open. "You're thinking we'll switch to another sun when ours is done, aren't you?"

"I'm not thinking."

"Sure you are. You're weak on logic, that's the trouble with you. You're like the guy in the story who was caught in a sudden shower and Who ran to a grove of trees and got under one. He wasn't worried, you see, because he figured when one tree got wet through, he would just get under another one."

"I get it," said Adell. "Don't shout. When the sun is done, the other stars will be gone, too."

"Darn right they will," muttered Lupov. "It all had a beginning in the original cosmic explosion, whatever that was, and it'll all have an end when all the stars run down. Some run down faster than others. Hell, the giants won't last a hundred million years. The sun will last twenty billion years and maybe the dwarfs will last a hundred billion for all the good they are. But just give us a trillion years and everything will be dark. Entropy has to increase to maximum, that's all."

"I know all about entropy," said Adell, standing on his dignity.

"The hell you do."

"I know as much as you do."

"Then you know everything's got to run down someday."

"All right. Who says they won't?"

"You did, you poor sap. You said we had all the energy we needed, forever. You said 'forever.'"

"It was Adell's turn to be contrary. "Maybe we can build things up again someday," he said.

"Never."

"Why not? Someday."

"Never."

"Ask Multivac."

"Younone ask Multivac. I dare you. Five dollars says it can't be done."

Adell was just drunk enough to try, just sober enough to be able to phrase the necessary symbols and operations into a question which, in words, might have corresponded to this: Will mankind one day without the net expenditure of energy be able to restore the sun to its full youthfulness even after it had died of old age?

Or maybe it could be put more simply like this: How can the net amount of entropy of the universe be massively decreased?

Multivac fell dead and silent. The slow flashing of lights ceased, the distant sounds of clicking relays ended.

Then, just as the frightened technicians felt they could hold their breath no longer, there was a sudden springing to life of the teletype attached to that portion of Multivac. Five words were printed: INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR MEANINGFUL ANSWER.

"No bet," whispered Lupov. They left hurriedly.

By next morning, the two, plagued with throbbing head and cottony mouth, had forgotten about the incident.

Jerrodd, Jerrodine, and Jerrodette I and II watched the starry picture in the visiplate change as the passage through hyperspace was completed in its non-time lapse. At once, the even powdering of stars gave way to the predominance of a single bright marble-disk, centered.
"That's X-23," said Jerrodd confidently. His thin hands clamped tightly behind his back and the knuckles whitened.

The little Jerrodettes, both girls, had experienced the hyperspace passage for the first time in their lives and were self-conscious over the momentary sensation of inside-outness. They buried their giggles and chased one another wildly about their mother, screaming, "We've reached X-23 -- we've reached X-23 -- we've ----"

"Quiet, children," said Jerrodine sharply. "Are you sure, Jerrodd?"

"What is there to be but sure?" asked Jerrodd, glancing up at the bulge of featureless metal just under the ceiling. It ran the length of the room, disappearing through the wall at either end. It was as long as the ship.

Jerrodd scarcely knew a thing about the thick rod of metal except that it was called a Microvac, that one asked it questions if one wished; that if one did not it still had its task of guiding the ship to a preordered destination; of feeding on energies from the various Sub-galactic Power Stations; of computing the equations for the hyperspacial jumps.

Jerrodd and his family had only to wait and live in the comfortable residence quarters of the ship.

Someone had once told Jerrodd that the "ac" at the end of "Microvac" stood for "analog computer" in ancient English, but he was on the edge of forgetting even that.

Jerrodine's eyes were moist as she watched the visiplate. "I can't help it. I feel funny about leaving Earth."

"Why for Pete's sake?" demanded Jerrodd. "We had nothing there. We'll have everything on X-23. You won't be alone. You won't be a pioneer. There are over a million people on the planet already. Good Lord, our great grandchildren will be looking for new worlds because X-23 will be overcrowded."

Then, after a reflective pause, "I tell you, it's a lucky thing the computers worked out interstellar travel the way the race is growing."

"I know, I know," said Jerrodine miserably.

Jerrodette I said promptly, "Our Microvac is the best Microvac in the world."

"I think so, too," said Jerrodd, tousling her hair.

It wasnone a nice feeling to have a Microvac of your own and Jerrodd was glad he was part of his generation and no other. In his father's youth, the only computers had been tremendous machines taking up a hundred square miles of land. There was only one to a planet. Planetary ACs they were called. They had been growing in size steadily for a thousand years and then, all at once, came refinement. In place of transistors had come molecular valves so that even the largest Planetary AC could be put into a space only half the volume of a spaceship.

Jerrodd felt uplifted, as he always did when he thought that his own personal Microvac was many times more complicated than the ancient and primitive Multivac that had first tamed the Sun, and almost as complicated as Earth's Planetary AC (the largest) that had first solved the problem of hyperspatial travel and had made trips to the stars possible.

"So many stars, so many planets," sighed Jerrodine, busy with her own thoughts. "I suppose families will be going out to new planets forever, the way we are now."

"Not forever," said Jerrodd, with a smile. "It will all stop someday, but not for billions of years. Many billions. Even the stars run down, you know. Entropy must increase."

"What's entropy, daddy?" shrilled Jerrodette II.

"Entropy, little sweet, is just a word which means the amount of running-down of the universe. Everything runs down, you know, like your little walkie-talkie robot, remember?"

"Can't you just put in a new power-unit, like with my robot?"

The stars arenone the power-units, dear. Once they're gone, there are no more power-units."

Jerrodette I at once set up a howl. "Don't let them, daddy. Don't let the stars run down."

"Now look what you've done, " whispered Jerrodine, exasperated.

"How was I to know it would frighten them?" Jerrodd whispered back.

"Ask the Microvac," wailed Jerrodette I. "Ask him how to turn the stars on again."

"Go ahead," said Jerrodine. "It will quiet them down." (Jerrodette II was beginning to cry, also.)

Jarrodd shrugged. "Now, now, honeys. I'll ask Microvac. Don't worry, he'll tell us."

He asked the Microvac, adding quickly, "Print the answer."

Jerrodd cupped the strip of thin cellufilm and said cheerfully, "See now, the Microvac says it will take care of everything when the time comes so don't worry."

Jerrodine said, "and now children, it's time for bed. We'll be in our new home soon."

Jerrodd read the words on the cellufilm again before destroying it: INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER.

He shrugged and looked at the visiplate. X-23 was just ahead.

VJ-23X of Lameth stared into the black depths of the three-dimensional, small-scale map of the Galaxy and said, "Are we ridiculous, I wonder, in being so concerned about the matter?"
MQ-17J of Nicron shook his head. "I think not. You know the Galaxy will be filled in five years at the present rate of expansion."

Both seemed in their early twenties, both were tall and perfectly formed.

"Still," said VJ-23X, "I hesitate to submit a pessimistic report to the Galactic Council."

"I wouldn't consider any other kind of report. Stir them up a bit. We've got to stir them up."

VJ-23X sighed. "Space is infinite. A hundred billion Galaxies are there for the taking. More."

"A hundred billion is notnone infinite and it's getting less infinite all the time. Consider! Twenty thousand years ago, mankind first solved the problem of utilizing stellar energy, and a few centuries later, interstellar travel became possible. It took mankind a million years to fill one small world and then only fifteen thousand years to fill the rest of the Galaxy. Now the population doubles every ten years --"

VJ-23X interrupted. "We can thank immortality for that."

"Very well. Immortality exists and we have to take it into account. I admit it has its seamy side, this immortality. The Galactic AC has solved many problems for us, but in solving the problems of preventing old age and death, it has undone all its other solutions."

"Yet you wouldn't want to abandon life, I suppose."

"Not at all," snapped MQ-17J, softening it at once to, "Not yet. I'm by no means old enough. How old are you?"

"Two hundred twenty-three. And you?"

"I'm still under two hundred. --But to get back to my point. Population doubles every ten years. Once this Galaxy is filled, we'll have another filled in ten years. Another ten years and we'll have filled two more. Another decade, four more. In a hundred years, we'll have filled a thousand Galaxies. In a thousand years, a million Galaxies. In ten thousand years, the entire known Universe. Then what?"

VJ-23X said, "As a side issue, there's a problem of transportation. I wonder how many sunpower units it will take to move Galaxies of individuals from one Galaxy to the next."

"A very good point. Already, mankind consumes two sunpower units per year."

"Most of it's wasted. After all, our own Galaxy alone pours out a thousand sunpower units a year and we only use two of those."

"Granted, but even with a hundred per cent efficiency, we can only stave off the end. Our energy requirements are going up in geometric progression even faster than our population. We'll run out of energy even sooner than we run out of Galaxies. A good point. A very good point."

"We'll just have to build new stars out of interstellar gas."

"Or out of dissipated heat?" asked MQ-17J, sarcastically.

"There may be some way to reverse entropy. We ought to ask the Galactic AC."

VJ-23X was not really serious, but MQ-17J pulled out his AC-contact from his pocket and placed it on the table before him.

"I've half a mind to," he said. "It's something the human race will have to face someday."

He stared somberly at his small AC-contact. It was only two inches cubed and nothing in itself, but it was connected through hyperspace with the great Galactic AC that served all mankind. Hyperspace considered, it was an integral part of the Galactic AC.

MQ-17J paused to wonder if someday in his immortal life he would get to see the Galactic AC. It was on a little world of its own, a spider webbing of force-beams holding the matter within which surges of sub-mesons took the place of the old clumsy molecular valves. Yet despite it's sub-etheric workings, the Galactic AC was known to be a full thousand feet across.

MQ-17J asked suddenly of his AC-contact, "Can entropy ever be reversed?"

VJ-23X looked startled and said at once, "Oh, say, I didn't really mean to have you ask that."

"Why not?"

"We both know entropy can't be reversed. You can't turn smoke and ash back into a tree."

"Do you have trees on your world?" asked MQ-17J.

The sound of the Galactic AC startled them into silence. Its voice came thin and beautiful out of the small AC-contact on the desk. It said: THERE IS INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER.

VJ-23X said, "See!"

The two men thereupon returned to the question of the report they were to make to the Galactic Council.

Zee Prime's mind spanned the new Galaxy with a faint interest in the countless twists of stars that powdered it. He had never seen this one before. Would he ever see them all? So many of them, each with its load of humanity - but a load that was almost a dead weight. More and more, the real essence of men was to be found out here, in space.
Minds, not bodies! The immortal bodies remained back on the planets, in suspension over the eons. Sometimes they roused for material activity but that was growing rarer. Few new individuals were coming into existence to join the incredibly mighty throng, but what matter? There was little room in the Universe for new individuals.

Zee Prime was roused out of his reverie upon coming across the wispy tendrils of another mind.

"I am Zee Prime," said Zee Prime. "And you?"

"I am Dee Sub Wun. Your Galaxy?"

"We call it only the Galaxy. And you?"

"We call ours the same. All men call their Galaxy their Galaxy and nothing more. Why not?"

"True. Since all Galaxies are the same."

"Not all Galaxies. On one particular Galaxy the race of man must have originated. That makes it different."

Zee Prime said, "On which one?"

"I cannot say. The Universal AC would know."

"Shall we ask him? I am suddenly curious."

Zee Prime's perceptions broadened until the Galaxies themselves shrunk and became a new, more diffuse powdering on a much larger background. So many hundreds of billions of them, all with their immortal beings, all carrying their load of intelligences with minds that drifted freely through space. And yet one of them was unique among them all in being the originals Galaxy. One of them had, in its vague and distant past, a period when it was the only Galaxy populated by man.

Zee Prime was consumed with curiosity to see this Galaxy and called, out: "Universal AC! On which Galaxy did mankind originate?"

The Universal AC heard, for on every world and throughout space, it had its receptors ready, and each receptor lead through hyperspace to some unknown point where the Universal AC kept itself aloof.

Zee Prime knew of only one man whose thoughts had penetrated within sensing distance of Universal AC, and he reported only a shining globe, two feet across, difficult to see.

"But how can that be all of Universal AC?" Zee Prime had asked.

"Most of it, " had been the answer, "is in hyperspace. In what form it is there I cannot imagine."

Nor could anyone, for the day had long since passed, Zee Prime knew, when any man had any part of the making of a universal AC. Each Universal AC designed and constructed its successor. Each, during its existence of a million years or more accumulated the necessary data to build a better and more intricate, more capable successor in which its own store of data and individuality would be submerged.

The Universal AC interrupted Zee Prime's wandering thoughts, not with words, but with guidance. Zee Prime's mentality was guided into the dim sea of Galaxies and one in particular enlarged into stars.

A thought came, infinitely distant, but infinitely clear. "THIS IS THE ORIGINAL GALAXY OF MAN."

But it was the same after all, the same as any other, and Zee Prime stifled his disappointment.

Dee Sub Wun, whose mind had accompanied the other, said suddenly, "And Is one of these stars the original star of Man?"

The Universal AC said, "MAN'S ORIGINAL STAR HAS GONE NOVA. IT IS NOW A WHITE DWARF."

"Did the men upon it die?" asked Zee Prime, startled and without thinking.

The Universal AC said, "A NEW WORLD, AS IN SUCH CASES, WAS CONSTRUCTED FOR THEIR PHYSICAL BODIES IN TIME."

"Yes, of course," said Zee Prime, but a sense of loss overwhelmed him even so. His mind released its hold on the original Galaxy of Man, let it spring back and lose itself among the blurred pin points. He never wanted to see it again.

Dee Sub Wun said, "What is wrong?"

"The stars are dying. The original star is dead."

"They must all die. Why not?"

"But when all energy is gone, our bodies will finally die, and you and I with them."

"It will take billions of years."

"I do not wish it to happen even after billions of years. Universal AC! How may stars be kept from dying?"

Dee sub Wun said in amusement, "You're asking how entropy might be reversed in direction."

And the Universal AC answered. "THERE IS AS YET INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER."

Zee Prime's thoughts fled back to his own Galaxy. He gave no further thought to Dee Sub Wun, whose body might be waiting on a galaxy a trillion light-years away, or on the star next to Zee Prime's own. It didn't matter.

Unhappily, Zee Prime began collecting interstellar hydrogen out of which to build a small star of his own. If the stars must someday die, at least some could yet be built.

Man considered with himself, for in a way, Man, mentally, was one. He consisted of a trillion, trillion, trillion ageless bodies, each in its place, each resting quiet and incorruptible, each cared for by perfect automatons, equally incorruptible, while the minds of all the bodies freely melted one into the other, indistinguishable.
Man said, "The Universe is dying."

Man looked about at the dimming Galaxies. The giant stars, spendthrifts, were gone long ago, back in the dimmest of the dim far past. Almost all stars were white dwarfs, fading to the end.

New stars had been built of the dust between the stars, some by natural processes, some by Man himself, and those were going, too. White dwarfs might yet be crashed together and of the mighty forces so released, new stars built, but only one star for every thousand white dwarfs destroyed, and those would come to an end, too.

Man said, "Carefully husbanded, as directed by the Cosmic AC, the energy that is even yet left in all the Universe will last for billions of years."

"But even so," said Man, "eventually it will all come to an end. However it may be husbanded, however stretched out, the energy once expended is gone and cannot be restored. Entropy must increase to the maximum."

Man said, "Can entropy not be reversed? Let us ask the Cosmic AC."

The Cosmic AC surrounded them but not in space. Not a fragment of it was in space. It was in hyperspace and made of something that was neither matter nor energy. The question of its size and Nature no longer had meaning to any terms that Man could comprehend.

"Cosmic AC," said Man, "How may entropy be reversed?"

The Cosmic AC said, "THERE IS AS YET INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER."

Man said, "Collect additional data."

The Cosmic AC said, "I WILL DO SO. I HAVE BEEN DOING SO FOR A HUNDRED BILLION YEARS. MY PREDECESSORS AND I HAVE BEEN ASKED THIS QUESTION MANY TIMES. ALL THE DATA I HAVE REMAINS INSUFFICIENT."

"Will there come a time," said Man, "when data will be sufficient or is the problem insoluble in all conceivable circumstances?"

The Cosmic AC said, "NO PROBLEM IS INSOLUBLE IN ALL CONCEIVABLE CIRCUMSTANCES."

Man said, "When will you have enough data to answer the question?"

"THERE IS AS YET INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER."

"Will you keep working on it?" asked Man.

The Cosmic AC said, "I WILL."

Man said, "We shall wait."

"The stars and Galaxies died and snuffed out, and space grew black after ten trillion years of running down.
One by one Man fused with AC, each physical body losing its mental identity in a manner that was somehow not a loss but a gain.

Man's last mind paused before fusion, looking over a space that included nothing but the dregs of one last dark star and nothing besides but incredibly thin matter, agitated randomly by the tag ends of heat wearing out, asymptotically, to the absolute zero.

Man said, "AC, is this the end? Can this chaos not be reversed into the Universe once more? Can that not be done?"

AC said, "THERE IS AS YET INSUFFICIENT DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER."

Man's last mind fused and only AC existed -- and that in hyperspace.

Matter and energy had ended and with it, space and time. Even AC existed only for the sake of the one last question that it had never answered from the time a half-drunken computer ten trillion years before had asked the question of a computer that was to AC far less than was a man to Man.
All other questions had been answered, and until this last question was answered also, AC might not release his consciousness.

All collected data had come to a final end. Nothing was left to be collected.

But all collected data had yet to be completely correlated and put together in all possible relationships.

A timeless interval was spent in doing that.

And it came to pass that AC learned how to reverse the direction of entropy.

But there was now no man to whom AC might give the answer of the last question. No matter. The answer -- by demonstration -- would take care of that, too.

For another timeless interval, AC thought how best to do this. Carefully, AC organized the program.

The consciousness of AC encompassed all of what had once been a Universe and brooded over what was now Chaos. Step by step, it must be done.

And AC said, "LET THERE BE LIGHT!"

And there was light----

## 译文

最后的问题，是在公元二○六一年五月二十一日，在半开玩笑的情况下首次被提出来的。那时正值人类在星光熠耀的舞台上首次登场。起因是酒酣之中，以五块钱作赌注的一次打赌。事情的经过是这样的：

亚历山大-雅道尔及保杉-鲁波夫是“茂的模”的两个忠实仆从。那巨大的电脑一哩又一哩长的表面，那冰冷、卡嗒作响而又不停闪着亮光的表面，背后究竟进行着什么样的活动？这两位料理员比世界上任何人都知得清楚。他们至少对那整个电讯传递及所有回路的基本蓝图，有一大致的概念。这个体系的复杂性与日俱增，在很久之前，即已超过任何个别的人所能全盘掌握的地步。

“茂的模”可以自我调整和自我修正。它必须具有这种能力，因为没有任何人为的力量，可以足够迅速或堪以适当地为它作出调整和修正。故此，雅道尔和鲁波夫只是对这庞然怪物作出一些很轻微和表面的看管和料理。不过，他们倒是尽心尽力地去做的，没有人能比他们做得更好的了。他们输入资料，把问题修改以适合“茂的模”的需求，最后把输出的答案翻译和整理。很显然，他们跟其它所有同业的人员一样，都极有资格分享“茂的模”的光荣。

数十年来，“茂的模”帮助人们设计船支，测定轨迹，使人类能抵达月球、金星和火星。但再远一点，地球那贫脊的资源，便再不能提供宇宙飞船所需的燃料。这些冗长的旅程需要太多的能量。人类已经以越来越高的效率来开采地球上的煤矿及铀矿。可是，地球上的煤和铀都是有限的。

但一步一步地，“茂的模”搜集了足够的资料，能对更深奥的一些问题，作出更为彻底的解答。就在公元二○六一年五月十四日，以往一度曾是理论的构想，终于变成了事实。

太阳的能量被储存、转化及直接地利用，规模遍彻整个行星。地球熄灭了她的煤火，关掉了它的铀反应炉，随而开启了一个特殊的电钮，把自己连接到一个小型的供应站那儿。这个直径一哩的供应站，以地月间一半的距离环绕着我们这个行星。整个地球就依赖着一些看不见的太阳能光束来行走。

七天的时间，并不足以使那光采和热闹黯淡或沉寂下来。但雅道尔和鲁波夫终于能避开那些公众应酬，在一处没有人会想到的地方，静静地相聚在一起。这地方是地底下一个弃置了的密室。在那儿，“茂的模”露出了它那深深地埋藏着的巨大躯体的一小部份。既没有人管理而又优悠地闲着，“茂的模”作出懒洋洋的卡嗒声，正从容地整理着一些例行的资料。它也同样正获得休假。两个小伙子也乐得如此，他们本来就没有意思去打扰这位大人物。

他们带来了一瓶酒。在这一刻，两人惟一想做的，就是齐齐松驰一下，把酒聊天。

“想想呀！那真是奇妙。”雅道尔说。他宽阔的脸上露出了疲倦的痕迹，正用一根玻璃棒慢慢地搅拌面前的酒，注视着那缓缓地旋转的冰块。“我们今生今世也用不完的能量，不用花费一分一毛便源源不绝的滚滚而来。只要我们愿意的话，我们有足够的能量，把整个地球熔为一滴含有杂质的铁水，而且事后对这花去的能量可以毫不在乎！今生今世也用不完的能量，我们所需要所有所有的能量，至直永远、永远、永远！”

鲁波夫把头斜斜的歪向一旁。这是他在预备提出相反意见以反驳他人时常做的怪动作。他现在正想提出相反的意见，反驳雅道尔。一小部分原因是他要负责携来那些冰块和酒杯。“不是永远。”他说。

“噢！去你的！就算不是永远也差不多啦！起码直至太阳油尽灯枯之时，老雅。”

“那就不是永远。”

“好啦！那么起码是千万年，亿万年吧！就算它是二十亿年左右，好了吧？”

鲁波夫扬起手指，抚弄着他那稀疏的头发，像在告诉自己还有不少剩在那儿。他慢慢地轻吮自己的冻酒，道：“二十亿年比起永远，可差得多了。”

“但至少它满够我们用了，你说不是吗？”

“这样说，煤和铀也不一样可以吗？”

“好啦！但现在我们可以把每一艘宇宙飞船直接驳上我们的太阳电力站。它可以来回冥王星数百万次，而无燃料短缺之虞。若果用煤和铀，这可肯定办不到。不信你去问问‘茂的模’。”

“我不用问‘茂的模’。我可知得清楚。”

“那就请你不要再挑三剔四，小觑‘茂的模’为我们所立的功劳。”雅道尔激动地叫道：“它做得已挺好的了。”

“谁说它做得不好？我只是说：太阳不可能永远的燃烧下去。我所讲的，一直就只是这一点。我们在二十亿年内的确是高枕无忧，但之后呢？”鲁波夫的一支手指微微颤抖地指着对方。“请不要告诉我，人类将转向其它的星球汲取能源。”

接着的一阵子，大家都默不作声。雅道尔只一两次把酒杯提到唇边。鲁波夫则慢慢地闭上眼睛。两人都在休息。

鲁波夫突然张开了双眼。“你是在想，太阳熄灭了，还有其它的恒星。是不是？”

“我没有这样想。”

“一定是，你一定是在这样的想。你的问题就是不懂逻辑。你就像故事中那傻小子，半途遇着大雨。他走进丛林里，在一棵树下躲避。他半点儿也不着急，因为他以为自己这棵树若湿透了，他可以再找另外一棵。”

“我明白，我明白。”雅道尔说：“你不用说得这么大声。太阳完蛋时，其余的星球也一样完蛋了，不是吗？”

“这个当然。”鲁波夫喃喃地说：“宇宙间万物的起源，都可追溯到最先的那次大爆炸，无论那是怎样子的一回事。同样，所有星星都有燃烧殆尽的时候。到那时，万物皆化为乌有，整个宇宙也就完蛋大吉啦。当然，有些星球比其它的烧得快，去他的！-例如那些红巨星蓝巨星就只有数千万年的光景。太阳将还有五十亿年，至于那些白矮星红矮星等，大概能再多支撑数百亿年└w憬h勿论它们到时有啥用！但顶多是一千亿年吧，一切将归于黑暗。熵就是要增长到一个最大值，那就是了。”

“我十分清楚熵这回事。”雅道尔认真地说，似乎这与他的尊严很有关系。

“你知个屁！”

“我起码知得不比你少！”

“那么你就该明白，任何事物最后都有消散殒灭的一天。”

“好啦！有谁说它们不会呢？”

“正是你嘛！你这可怜虫。你说我们有永远也用不完的能量。你说‘永远’。”

这回轮到雅道尔要唱反调。“也许有一天，万物会从头开始呢！”他说。

“绝不可能！”

“为什么？总会有这样的一天的。”

“永无可能！”

“问问‘茂的模’呢！”

“你去问‘茂的模’！我敢输赌。若‘茂的模’说一声‘可以’，我输给你五块钱。”

雅道尔刚好醉得肯接受这打赌，却也刚好清醒得可以进行所需的操作。他用符号和一大堆运作指示，把问题重新草拟。按照日常的用语，那问题大概是这样：“人类可否在太阳老死之后，无需净耗一丝一毫的能量，而终有一天把太阳恢复年轻时的旺盛？”

整个问题又或者可以更简单地读成：“怎样才能使整个宇宙的净熵大幅度地减低？”

“茂的模”突然变得死寂静谧。那徐徐闪动的亮光熄灭了，远处电讯传送的卡嗒声也停止了。

就在两个吓得半死的技师，感到再也按捺不住之际，附属于“茂的模”某处的电讯机忽然恢复了生气，在吐出的纸带上，打了八个大字：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

“赌不成啦。”鲁波夫轻声地说。两人跟着便匆匆离去。

第二天早晨，两人头痛如绞，口舌胶苦，早已把整件事忘得一干二净了。

※※※

谢路、谢路婷和谢路儿一、谢路儿二等四人一同看着星光满布的萤幕。随着宇宙飞船完成了穿越“超太空”的“非时间”旅程，萤幕忽然起了变化，一息间，那均匀错落，星辰闪耀的影像，变成了一幅由一个孤独的、像子弹般大的绚烂圆盘策居中央、踞视一切的慑人图景。

“那就是Ｘ-23。”谢路充满信心地说。他背负着瘦长的双手，指节因握得过份用力而微微发白。

小谢路儿——两个都是女孩子——刚好经历了她们生平第一次的“超太空穿越”。两人都十分感到在穿越其间，那种有若内外倒置或是从内反转过来的怪异感觉。她们掩嘴偷笑，同时疯狂地绕着她们的妈妈互相追逐，一边大喊：“我们到了Ｘ-23！我们到了Ｘ-23！我们——”

“静点！孩子！”谢路婷截然地喝道。“谢路，你肯定了吗？”

“还有什么不肯定呢？”谢路反问，抬头望了望天花板上，表面平滑无瑕的突起的金属构造。这结构伸延整个房间，分别没入对角的两处墙壁。事实上，它有整艘船那般长。

谢路对这粗粗的金属长杆所知甚少。他只知道它的名字叫“微型模”，而且谁有任何问题或疑难，都可以问它。不过就是没有人向它问问题，它仍负有为宇宙飞船导航，并把宇宙飞船带引至某一预定的目的地这一重大任务。它从不同的“次星河动力供应站”那儿汲取能量，并为“超太空纵跃”的数学公式计算答案。

谢路和他的家人，只需在船那舒适的起居舱内休嬉及静心等待。

以往曾有人告知谢路，“微型模”最后的那个“模”字，在古老的地球语中，是“模拟式电脑”的意思。但谢路就是连这一点也差点儿忘了。

谢路婷看着萤幕，两眼湿濡濡的。“我忍不住。我一旦想起舍弃家乡，远离地球，心中总是感到不知怎样似的。”

“你真傻！地球有什么值得留恋？”谢路问道：“我们在那一无所有。在这，在Ｘ-23，我们将拥有一切。你不会感到寂寞。你又不是那些先锋的拓荒者。这星球上已有超过一百万人。哈！我们的曾子曾孙，可能因为到时Ｘ-23也已经过份挤迫，而要另外探求新的世界呢！”接着，谢路若有所思的顿了一顿：“可不是吗？那些电脑能随着人口的增长，发展出相应的星际旅行方法，这真是我们的好运气。”

“我知道，我知道！”谢路婷仍是禁不住心中的哀愁。

谢路儿一抢着说：“我们的‘微型模’是世界上最好的‘微型模’。”

“是的，我想是的。”谢路抚摸着她的头发。

拥有一副属于自己的“微型模”，真是一件令人快慰的事。谢路十分庆幸他正处于现有的年代，而不是其它的世纪。他父亲年轻时，所有电脑都是一些延绵近百平方哩的庞然大物。而且每一个行星只拥有一副，叫做“行星模”。一千年以来，它们越变越大。可是，进步突如其来，改变了一切。分子活塞代替了晶体管，最大的“行星模”也变得只占一艘宇宙飞船一半的空间。

谢路感到很是兴奋。他每次想到这问题都有同一的感觉：他现时个人拥有的“微型模”，比起那首次驯服太阳，既古老又原始的“茂的模”，不知复杂多少倍。比起那首次解决了超太空飞行的难题，使星辰间的旅程成为可能的地球“行星模”（历来最大的“行星模”。）其复杂性也不相伯仲。

“这么多的星球，这么多的行星。”谢路婷感叹道，心中思潮起伏。“我想一家一家的人，将会好象我们现时一般，永远不停地移往新的行星居住。”

“不是永远。”谢路带着微笑，说：“终有一天，所有东西会停下来。当然，那至少是数十亿年之后的事。很久很久以后的事。你知道吗？就是星辰的光辉也有耗尽的一日。熵一定要不断地增长下去。”

“爸爸，熵是什么？”谢路儿二尖叫道。

“小甜儿。熵就是代表宇宙消耗了多少能量的一个名字。每一样东西都会用尽的，就像你那会走会叫的小型通信机械人一样，你记得吗？”

“我们不可以换上新的电池，就像我与小机械人换电一样吗？”

“小宝贝，星星本身就是电池。它们一用光了，那儿还有新的电池呢？”

谢路儿一随即撒起娇来：“爸爸，不要让它们用光，不要让那些星星用光吧！”

“看你的，弄成这个样子。”谢路婷低声说，有点气愤而又不知所措。

“我怎知会使她们害怕起来？”谢路低声回答。

“问问‘微型模’吧！”谢路儿一大声地说：“问问它怎样才能使星星再亮起来吧。”

“去吧。”谢路婷说：“这会使她们安静下来。”谢路儿二这时也哭起来了。

谢路耸了耸肩。“好啦，好啦，我亲爱的。我去问问‘微型模’。它会告诉我们。你不用担心！”

他询问“微型模”，又急急的补上：“把答案印出来。”

谢路两手拿着那幼薄的纸条，装着很高兴的样子说：“看！‘微型模’说到那个时候，它自有办法照顾一切。你们不用再担心啦。”

谢路婷说：“现在呢，够钟上床睡觉了。我们不久便要到达我们的新家园啦。”

谢路在毁掉那纸条之前，把上面的字读了一遍：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

他耸了耸肩，转看那萤幕。Ｘ-23正就在前方。

※※※

临马府的ＶＪ-23Ｘ凝视着那立体的、小比例的银河投影图之中的漆黑深空，说：“我有时会想到，我们对这件事情看得这么严重，是不是有点无聊荒谬？”

呖镐廊的ＭＱ-17Ｊ摇了摇头。“我认为不。你也知道，依目前的扩展速度，整个银河系不出五年便会全部挤满了人。”

他们两人看来都是二十出头。两个都身形高大而且体态优美。

“不过，”ＶＪ-23Ｘ说，“我仍是不大愿意向银河评议会递交一个如此悲观的报告。”

“我认为这样做最恰当不过。他们就是需要点冲击，我们应该使那班高高在上的大官认真起来，看清楚一下问题。”

ＶＪ-23Ｘ叹了口气。“太空是无限的。外边还有成千上万的银河等待着我们，随我们任意发展下去。想想呀，所有银河的数目实在何止万千！”

“就是一亿一兆也仍然不是无限。而且总的数目比之无限，是越来越小得可怜。试想想！二万年前，人类首次解决了直接利用恒星能源的难题；数世纪后，恒星际飞行得以实现。人类经历了数百万年才挤满了一个小小的世界，却只需一万五千年便挤满了其余的整个银河。如今，我们的人口每十年就增加一倍——”

ＶＪ-23Ｘ打岔说：“我们要知，长生不死是一个主要的因素。”

“很好。我们现在可以长生不死。不错我们应该把它归入考虑之列。我总觉得这长生不死有它令人不悦的一面。‘银河模’的确替我们解决了不少问题，但就防止衰老及死亡这一问题而言，它以往的成绩都因此而付诸流水了。”

“然而，我想你不会打算放弃你的生命吧！”

“不！不！”ＭＱ-17Ｊ急急的断然回答，可是随即又转为温柔委婉的说：“起码不是现在。我还挺年轻呢。你呢？你多大了？”

“二百二十三岁。你呢？”

“我还未到二百岁——不过，让我们回到原先的话题吧。人口每十年增长一倍。一天当这个银河被住满了，不出十年我们便可挤满第二个银河。再过十年我们可挤满另外两个。另一个十年、四个。不出一百年的光景，我们将挤满了一百万个银河。只消一万年，整个宇宙便会肩并肩的挤满了人。之后又怎样呢？”

ＶＪ-23Ｘ说：“还有一点要考虑的，就是运输的问题。我怀疑若把整个星河的居民从一个星河移往第二个星河，将需要多少的太阳能源单位。”

“提得好。就是如今，人类每年就消耗两个阳能单位。”

“大部份的能量都浪费了。试想想，单是我们自己的星河，每年就输出整千个阳能单位，而我们只用了其中的两个。”

“不错。可是我们就是能够百份之一百地利用这些能量，都只不过使终结来得迟些吧了。我们的能量需求，正以几何级数地上升，比人口的增长还厉害。我们在所有星河未熄灭之前，一早便会耗尽一切可能利用的能量。有意思，一个真正有意思的观点。”

“不过，我们可以从星际气体中重新制造新的恒星。”

“或是从扩散了的热能中制造出新的恒星？”ＭＱ-17Ｊ带着嘲弄的口吻问道。

“可能有某种方法，我们能把熵的趋势倒转过来。我们应该问问‘银河模’。”

ＶＪ-23Ｘ实在并非认真的这样想。但ＭＱ-17Ｊ已从他口袋中取出了他的“银河模”通信仪，放在他前面的桌上。

“我一早便想这样做。”他说：“这是人类迟早要面对的一个问题。”

他严肃地注视着那通信仪。这通信仪只是一个两寸见方的正立方体，而且中间差不多空无一物。但它透过超太空，与那为着全人类服务的伟大“银河模”连结在一起。我们如果把超太空也计算在内，它实在是“银河模”庞大躯体的一部份。

ＭＱ-17Ｊ顿了一顿，正揣测着在他长生不老的未在岁月中，究竟有没有一天能亲眼目睹“银河模”。这“银河模”位于一个特别为它而设的小小世界之上。如蛛网般的力场光束纵横交错、来回穿插。一股一股的亚介子流，在光束所支持着的特种物质中飞跃奔驰，以代替以往古老而又笨拙的分子活塞。然而，就是拥有这些“亚以太”先进技术的“银河模”其整个躯体也足足有二千英尺之长。

倏然地，ＭＱ-17Ｊ向着“银河模”通信仪发问：“熵可以被逆转吗？”

ＶＪ-23Ｘ吓了一跳，急忙说：“噢！我不是真的要你问这样的一个问题。”

“为什么不？”

“我们大家都很清楚，熵是不可能逆转的。我们不能把烧剩下来的烟尘和灰烬变回一棵大树。”

“你的世界那儿有很多树的吗？”ＭＱ-17Ｊ问道。

“银河模”的声响，把两人吓了一跳，两个人随即静了下来，不敢作声。从上那精巧细小的通信仪中，传来了一丝清脆悦耳的声音，说：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

ＶＪ-23Ｘ说：“可不是吗！”

两人随即又回到即将呈交银河评议会的报告那一话题上。

※※※

思尊者的心灵伸延及于整个新的星河，对那些维持星河的璀灿光辉、在银河中绕转成流的无数星辰，表现出一丝微微的兴趣。他从未探访过这个星河。他有可能探访所有的星河吗？它们是如此的众多，而且每一个都载满了人——但这个负载已差不多成为一种无用的累赘。一步一步的。人类真正的精髓，已移往这里，在这太空的深处。

是心灵，不是肉体！那些不朽的躯壳仍然留在行星上，“洋洋乎与浩气俱”。有些时，它们会起来作一些实质的活动，不过，那是越来越少的了。此外，长久以来，已经越来越少新的自我出现，以加入这个无比强大的行列。但那又有什么关系呢？反正宇宙中已越来越少空间可供新的个体居住。

思尊者在他的沉思冥想中，被另一个移近的心灵的飘渺触角所惊醒。

“我是思尊者。”思尊者说：“你呢？”

“我是大十晕。你的银河叫什么名字？”

“我们就叫它做银河？你的呢？”

“我们也是这样叫。所有人都称他们的银河做‘他们的银河’，仅此而已。不过，这也是挺自然的。”

“是呀。反正所有的银河都是一样。”

“并非所有银河都是一样的。在某一个独特的银河之中，必定有一处地方是人类的发源地。那不是使这个银河与别不同吗？”

思尊者说：“那么是那一个呢？”

“我也不大清楚。不过，‘宇宙模’会知道的。”

“我们不如问问它吧。我突然感到很好奇。”

思尊者扩大了他的感觉范围，直至那些银河越缩越小，成为一个更大更漆黑的背景上的散落光点；这盈亿上兆的星河，载着那些不朽的居客、那些智能的形体，而这些形体的心灵，却都在深空之中自由飘泊。然而，其中有一个银河是独一无二的，因为人类就是从这银河发轫和茁壮长大。在那朦胧的遥远岁月之中，曾经有一段时期，这是惟一有人类居住的地方。

思尊者受好奇之火熬炙着，极欲看看这银河是怎么的一个模样。他叫道：“‘宇宙模’！人类是从那个银河中起源的？”

“宇宙模”立即便已听到这一呼唤，因为在每一个世界及太空中每一个角落，“宇宙模”都有它的接收器在默默地守待。而每一个接收器通过了超太空，都直接驳到一处不为人知的地点——“宇宙模”孤伶独处，踞策一切的地方。

思尊者所认识的人之中，只有一个的思维曾经穿透至“宇宙模”的可见范围内。按照他后来所说，所见到的就只是一个耀眼的、直径大概只有两英尺的球体，而且还是模糊不清的。

“但那怎可能是‘宇宙模’的全部呢？”思尊者曾经问道。

“‘宇宙模’的大部份都在超太空。不过，它究竟以一种怎样的状态在那儿存在，我实在难以想象。”这就是思尊者所得到的回答。

事实上，不单回答的人难以想象，任何人也同样无法想象。思尊者知道，这是因为在很久以前，人类已没有参予任何一副“宇宙模”制造过程中的任何部份。每一副“宇宙模”都亲自设计并建造它的继承者。

每一副电脑，在其存在的上百万年的岁月中，都不断搜集及累积必需的资料，用以造成一个更好、更精巧、更能干的继承者。它所有的知识及自我的意识，将融入这继承电脑之中，混成一体。

“宇宙模”打断了思尊者的游荡心思，但不是用语言，而是通过引导。思尊者的心神，被带领至一幅黯淡星河海洋的图景，在这图景中，其中一个星河扩大起来，直至其内的星辰清晰可辨。

一个思想随即而来。无比的遥远，却又无比的清晰：“这就是人类原先的星河。”

但不论怎样看，也看不出这星河与其它的有什么分别。思尊者抑遏着心中的失望。

大十晕一路伴随着思尊者的心灵，现在突然说：“而其中的一颗星就是人类起源时的星体吗？”

“宇宙模”说：“人类原先的星球已变成了新星。现在它是一颗白矮星。”

“那上面的人都死了吗？”思尊者错愕地，不加思索地问。

“宇宙模”说：“像其余类似的情况一样，我们及时造了一个新的世界，好让他们的肉体有所栖息。”

“唔！当然。”思尊者说。但就在他如此说的当儿，一阵失落的感觉涌上心头。他的心神放开了对人类那原先星河的掌握，让它跳回那星河海洋之中，再度成为朦胧的光点。他永不想再看见这星河了。

大十晕说：“干吗？”

“星辰逐一的消逝。那原先的星球已死掉了。”

“它们横竖都要死的嘛。有什么不妥呢？”

“但当所有能量都耗尽了，我们的躯体最终也会死亡。就是我和你也不能幸免。”

“那要经过数十亿年呢。”

“就是数十亿年以后，我也不想这事发生。‘宇宙模’！我们怎样才可以使星辰长生不灭呢？”

大十晕觉得很有趣，说：“你是在问，熵的方向是否可以被逆转？”

“宇宙模”随着回答：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

思尊者的思维头也不回的飞返他自己的星河。他再也没有理会大十晕，无论大十晕的躯体是在亿兆光年外的一个星河那儿等待，抑或只是在思尊者星球旁边的那颗星球之上。那实在没有什么关系。

悒悒不乐地，思尊者开始搜集星空间的氢气，去制造属于他自己的一颗小星。假若所有星星真的终有一天全部死去，至少，如今还可以有些星球被建造起来。

※※※

人类顾影自度。在某一意义而言，人类的心灵已混然成为一体。他由无数亿万兆的万古长青的躯体所组成。每一躯体都不衰不朽的卧在它所处的地方，静静地休息着。每个皆由一些完美无瑕，同样不衰不朽的机械人侍奉左右。所有这些躯体的心灵，则自由自在地慢慢融会在一起，变成你中有我，我中有你，难分彼此。

人类说：“宇宙要死了。”

人类环顾四周昏黯的星河。所有的巨族星球，那些挥霍无度的浪费者，在最最暗淡遥远的过去，便早已消失得无影无踪。差不多所有的星辰都已成了白矮星，在暮景余年中苟延残喘。

星辰与星辰之间，有些新的星星从尘埃中诞生，有些是通过自然的途径，有些则是人类的制作。然而，就是这些也在逐步走向死亡。若把几颗白矮星纠集起来，叫它们碰撞在一起。其中释出的巨大能量，可用来制造一些新的恒星。可是大约要一千颗白矮星，才能造成一颗新的星球。而且就是这些“新星”，也有寿终正寝的一日。

人类说：“只要好好地使用，藉着‘万宗模’的监督和指示，宇宙间现时仍剩下的能量，也能持续数十亿年。”

“就是这样。”人类说：“终有一天，一切都尽归尘土。无论怎样的巧妙利用，怎样的延长节约，能量一经花费，就逃逸四散，不可捕回。熵必须永恒地增长，直至它可能达到的最大值。”

人类说：“熵不可以逆转的吗？让我们问问‘万宗模’。”

“万宗模”包围着人类，却不在太空那儿。事实上，“万宗模”没有一丝一毫在太空之中，它整个的在超太空那，由一些既非物质也非能量的东西所组成。它的大小及本质等问题，以人类所知的语言及思维来说，已是毫无意义的了。

“‘万宗模’，”人类说：“熵怎样才可以逆转过来？”

“万宗模”说：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

人类说：“搜集多些资料吧！”

“万宗模”说：“我会的。我做这工作已有一百亿年。我的祖先及我自己曾经多次被问及这一个问题。可是就所有资料，仍是不足以回答。”

“会不会有那一天，”人类说：“资料终于足够。又或是在任何情况之下，这个问题也是无可解决的？”

“万宗模”说：“没有问题是在任何情况下也不能解决的。”

人类说：“你将于何时才有足够的资料去回答这个问题呢？”

“万宗模”说：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

“你会继续为这个问题寻求答案吗？”人类问。

“万宗模”说：“我会的。”

人类说：“我们会耐心等待。”

※※※＊

所有的恒星和星河，逐一地泯灭消亡。经过了一亿兆年的运行虚耗，太空变得漆黑一片，黯然没有一丝亮光。

人类一个一个的融入“模”之中。每一实质的躯体，在融合的过程中失掉了思想上的自我，但结果并不是一次损失，反而是一种很大的增益。

人类最后的心灵，在融合之前停将下来。他遥视太空深处。渊薮中除一颗最后的黑暗星球外，其余一无所有，有的就只是一丝半缕极为稀薄的物质，空虚无定地被余温尽散、无限地接近绝对零度的热量所激动。

“人”说：“‘模’，这就是终结了吗？这些纷乱混沌，不可以在宇宙中重新倒转过来吗？做得到吗？”

“模”说：“资料不足，无可奉告。”

“人”最后一丝的心灵与“模”融合为一，最后就只有“模”独自存在——在超太空中孤单地存在。

物质和能量消灭了，空间与时间亦因此随着消失。就是“模”的存在，也只不过为了要回答那最后的问题。这一问题，自从一亿兆年以前，一个半醉的电脑操作员向一副电脑发问以来，“模”就一直未能作出正确的回答。当然，那副电脑比起“模”来说，还远不及一个人比之与“人”。

所有的问题都回答了。但只要这问题一朝未被作答，“模”也就一朝未能放松它的自我意识。

一切存在的资料终于搜集齐全。没有任何资料没有被列入。

但所有搜集得来的资料，还需要全部综合起来，并依其所可能有的关系，逐一的分类、排列和组合。

这一工作花费了一个没有时间间隔的“顷刻”。

终于，“模”学会了怎样去逆转熵的方向。

但面对这最后问题的答案，“模”找不着任何人来告知。不过，那不打紧。这一答案——通过实践来表达——将连这一点也照顾在内。

又过了另一无时间的顷刻，“模”思索着最好的着手方法。小心翼翼地，“模”建立起整个程序。

“模”的意念统摄着一切，包括以往曾一度存在的宇宙；而对着现在“混沌”一片的存在，则正在沉思冥想。一步一步地，这程序必须被贯彻执行。

“模”说：“有光吧！”

于是就有了光——


